How to consume data from an API using react (#1104)
section-io/engineering-education: articles/how-to-consume-data-from-an-API-using-react/index.md

The goal of this tutorial is to create a React application that consumes data from an API.

### Prerequisites

To follow along in this tutorial, you must have:

 - Basic knowledge in using React and Bootstrap.
 
 - Node.js installed in your computer.

### Step 1 – Understand the data coming from the API

Before creating any react web application, it's vital to evaluate the type of information presented by the API. Some of the areas to look at include `variables names,` `types,` `dates,` and `arrays.` Data from an API is commonly presented in a `JSON` format. This makes it much easier for it to be consumed in the application.

In this tutorial, we will be using [omdapi](http://www.omdbapi.com/). One needs a valid key to gain access to this API. This key can be generated from the omdapi website and looks something like this `cebd9b53`.

The `key` is included in the `API` request, as shown.

```
http://www.omdbapi.com/?i=tt3896198&apikey=cebd9b53

> ```

Reviewer: You should provide steps on how and where to acquire the API key from the Website with Screenshots.

Also don't include your API key with the article.

### Step 5: Creating the Movie web page

Please note that this page will hold our logic for requesting and handling data from the omdapi. To get started, create a new folder named components in the src directory. In the components folder, create a file called Movie.js. Before we move forward, we need to import `useEffect` and `useState`. We do so by adding the following line in the `Movie.js` file.

```javascript
import React, {useEffect, useState} from 'react';
```

The `useEffect` allows `React` to perform a specific action after a web page is loaded. In our case, we will use `useEffect` to make network requests to the API.
`useState` method will help in state management. It ensures that `UI` components are updated in case there of any data changes. 

The next step is to create a function named `Movie`, as shown below.

```javascript
Function Movie(){
}
```

We will add other logic and elements in the above `Movie` component.

> We need to define several constants in the Movie component. 

Reviewer: Also, it would be better if you instruct the users to add the HTML elements along with the associated state, like the input element instead of doing it far down below in another step.

The readers will have a better understanding of what is associated with what.

const [userquery, setUserQuery] = useState('chicken');
const API_KEY = "cebd9b53";
const url = `http://www.omdbapi.com/?t=${userquery}&apikey=${API_KEY}`;
```

The `movie` will hold data returned from the omdAPI. The `setMovie` helps in changing the contents of the movie.
The search variable will help retrieve user input. This value is updated by the `setSearch` function whenever the user enters a value in the input field.
Finally, the `userquery` and `setUserQuery` hold the actual values that will be sent to the `omdapi` to perform a search. Let's dive into the actual methods.

#### 1.	getMovie

This method will be called whenever the page is reloaded. It will make a request to the API and return a movie object. The `getMovie` function uses async and await. This is because network operations may take some time before they are completed. We, therefore, need to wait for the result. When we get the response, we convert it into JSON and store it in the movie variable. Here is the code for the `getMovie` object.
```
const getMovie = async()=>{
  const response = await fetch(url);
  const data = await response.json()
  setMovie(data);
};
```
#### 2.	getInput

> This method helps in getting the users' input before a query is performed. It listens for changes in the input field. The entered value is then updated using the setSearch method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method helps in updating the search query state when the value of the input changes, The value of the search state is updated using the `setSearch` method.
```

```

Next, Let's create a state to hold the search input from the user. This value is updated by the `setSearch` function whenever the user enters a value in the input field. The final value is then added to the search url.

```javascript
const [search, setSearch] = useState('');
```

You can also have a constant for your API key or include it in your url directly.

```javascript
const API_KEY = "your_api_key";
const url = `http://www.omdbapi.com/?t=${search}&apikey=${API_KEY}`;
```

The `App` component also has several functions which are discussed below.

#### 1.	getMovie

This method will be called whenever the search button is clicked. It will make a request to the API and return a movie object. The `getMovie` function uses async and await. This is because network operations may take some time before they are completed. We, therefore, need to wait for the result. When we get the response, we convert it into JSON and store it in the movie variable. 

Async - It helps in performing promise-based or asynchronous operations. 
await -  keyword allows you to wait for a Promise.

A promise is something which can be returned after the completion of a asynchronous operation.

> You can learn more about async, await, and promise from [here](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_promise.asp).

Reviewer: Can you explain more about Promises? You should talk about how it can either get resolved or rejected. Also a better explanation about what a Promise is required. Refer [MDN docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise).

Promise is a very important part of API requests. Hence, a better explanation is necessary for the readers to fully understand the topic.

    }

    const onInputChange = e =>{
      setSearch(e.target.value);
    }

    useEffect(()=> {
      getMovie();
    }, []);

    return(
      <div>
        <input type="text" value={search} onChange={onInputChange}/>
        <button type="submit" onClick={getMovie}>Search</button>
            <br></br>
            if(movie==null){
              <p>Movie Not Found</p>
            }else{
            <img src={movie.Poster} alt=""/>
            <h4>Title: {movie.Title}</h4>
            <p>Year: {movie.Year}</p>
            <p>Writer: {movie.Writer}</p>
            }
      </div>
    );

}

export default App;

```
### Step 7: Handling errors
Errors are a common occurence when dealing with an API. For this tutorial, we need to notify the user in case a movie is not found in the database. One key variable we can use to track the data is `Response`. The API returns the `Response` with a value of `True` when a movie is found and `False` if its unavailable. We, therefore, check the state of this variable.

To do this, we need a new method and an if else statement. create a method named checkResponse in the app.js file. Add the following code.

```JSX
function checkResponse(data){

>   if(data.Response==="True"){

Reviewer: What do you do in case there is no response from the API due to network issues? 

You should discuss error handling with `try/catch` blocks in case there is a network error or server error.

To do this, we need a new method and an if else statement. create a method named checkResponse in the app.js file. Add the following code.

```JSX
function checkResponse(data){
   if(data.Response==="True"){
    return(
      <div>
         <!-- <img src={data.Poster} alt=""/>
         <h4>Title: {data.Title}</h4>
         <p>Year: {data.Year}</p>
         <p>Writer: {data.Writer}</p>
         <p>{data.Response}</p> -->
      </div>
    );
   }
   return (
     <p>No Movie found</p>
   );
 }
```

A `No Movie Found` message is displayed in case the response is False.

> Note the `Response` variable stores a string rather than a boolean.

We need to replace the following code with our function as shown below.

```JSX
<!-- <img src={data.Poster} alt=""/>
<h4>Title: {data.Title}</h4>
<p>Year: {data.Year}</p>
<p>Writer: {data.Writer}</p>
<p>{data.Response}</p> -->

 {checkResponse(movie)}

> ```

Reviewer: This part is a little bit confusing, can you provide better code snippets?

   "Language":"English",
   "Country":"USA",
   "Awards":"Nominated for 1 Oscar. Another 15 wins & 57 nominations.",
   "Poster":"https://m.media-amazon.com/images/M/MV5BNjM0NTc0NzItM2FlYS00YzEwLWE0YmUtNTA2ZWIzODc2OTgxXkEyXkFqcGdeQXVyNTgwNzIyNzg@._V1_SX300.jpg",
   "Ratings":[
      {
         "Source":"Internet Movie Database",
         "Value":"7.6/10"
      },
      {
         "Source":"Rotten Tomatoes",
         "Value":"85%"
      },
      {
         "Source":"Metacritic",
         "Value":"67/100"
      }
   ],
   "Metascore":"67",
   "imdbRating":"7.6",
   "imdbVotes":"562,796",
   "imdbID":"tt3896198",
   "Type":"movie",
   "DVD":"N/A",
   "BoxOffice":"$389,813,101",
   "Production":"Marvel Studios, Walt Disney Pictures",
   "Website":"N/A",
   "Response":"True"
}
```

In the above `JSON` response, we have data like the `Title,` `Year,` `Rated,` `Released,` `Runtime,` `Genre`, etc, of the movie Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2.

### Step 2: Creating a react project.

Let's create a React application using the following command:

```
npx create-react-app OMDbApi

> ```

Reviewer: Newer versions of `create-react-app` don't support app names with an uppercase letter. Provide an app name with lowercase letters like `omdbapi`.

Also, syntax highlighting is missing. mark it as `bash`.

![structure](/engineering-education/how-to-consume-data-from-an-API-using-react/structure.png)

### Step 4: Developing the react application

Use `npm start` to start the development server. By default, the react projects are usually hosted at `http://localhost:3000/`.

We'll write all of our code in the `App.js`. Modify the `App.js` file to look like this before we start.

```JSX
import React from 'react';

function App() {
  return (
    <div className="App">
    
    </div>
  );
}

export default App;
```

We should import `useEffect` and `useState` into this component.

```JSX
import React, {useEffect, useState} from 'react';
```

The `useEffect` hook allows `React` to perform a specific action when the state changes. In our case, we will use `useEffect` to make network requests to the API when the component mounts for the first time.

The `useState` hook will help in creating a state and a function to update that state. When you update a state, the component will re-render.

Let's create a state for the movie. The `movie` state will hold data returned from the OMDb API. The `setMovie` helps in updating the `movie` state.

```JSX

> const [movie, setMovie] = useState([]);

Reviewer: why is the initial state an array? it should be an empty object because the response is an object.

```JSX
async getData(){
  //do something
  //await statement
}
```

This is because network operations are asynchronous in nature. Therefore, an API request will return a promise and we should wait for the promise to get resolved. The promise will be resolved if the API request is successful. If not, the promise will be rejected.

The `await` keyword allows you to wait for a Promise to get resolved. We can incorporate the await keyword in the getData method as follows.

```JSX
async getData(){
    var user = await fetch("your_url")
}
```

You can learn more about async, await, and promise from [here](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_promise.asp). This tutorial uses async and await methods.

We can handle server and network errors using a `try/catch` block. We send a network request inside the `try` block . If an error occurs, the catch block will be executed.

Here is the code for the `getMovie` function.

```JSX
const getMovie = async () => {
  try {
     const response = await fetch(url);
      const data = await response.json()
      setMovie(data);
   } catch (e) {
       console.error(e.toString);
   } 

> }

Reviewer: Inconsistent code snippet: Here, you've provided `e.toString` in the catch block, and below, you've just provided `e`. 

Just print `e` in both places. Also, rename the variable to `error` to provide better clarity.

Here is the complete code for the `App.js` component

```JSX
import './App.css';
import React, {useEffect, useState} from 'react';

function App() {
    const [movie, setMovie] = useState([]);
    const [search, setSearch] = useState('');
    const API_KEY = "cebd9b53";
    const url = `http://www.omdbapi.com/?t=${search}&apikey=${API_KEY}`;

    const getMovie = async()=>{
      try {
        const response = await fetch(url);
         const data = await response.json()
         setMovie(data);
      } catch (e) {
          console.error(e);
      } 
    }

    const onInputChange = e =>{
      setSearch(e.target.value);
    }

    useEffect(()=> {
      getMovie();
    }, []);

    return(
      <div>
        <input type="text" value={search} onChange={onInputChange}/>
        <button type="submit" onClick={getMovie}>Search</button>
         <br></br>
         if(movie==null){
           <p>Movie Not Found</p>
         }else{
            <img src={movie.Poster} alt=""/>
            <h4>Title: {movie.Title}</h4>
            <p>Year: {movie.Year}</p>
            <p>Writer: {movie.Writer}</p>
         }
      </div>

>     );

Reviewer: You can't have an if condition inside JSX. This is throwing an error.

Author: I cannot see this code. I have this. If else is not inside jsx
function checkResponse(data){
   if(data.Response==="True"){
    return(
      <div>
         <!-- <img src={data.Poster} alt=""/>
         <h4>Title: {data.Title}</h4>
         <p>Year: {data.Year}</p>
         <p>Writer: {data.Writer}</p>
         <p>{data.Response}</p> -->
      </div>
    );
   }

   return (
     <p>No Movie found</p>
   );
 }

Reviewer: @WanjaMIKE check the line number to find the code.

It's in Step 5. The final code for App.js that you have provided.

}

export default App;
```
### Step 6: Handling errors

Errors are a common occurence when dealing with an API. For this tutorial, we need to notify the user in case a movie is not found in the database. One key variable we can use to track the data is `Response`. The API returns the `Response` with a value of `True` when a movie is found and `False` if its unavailable. We, therefore, check the state of this variable.

To do this, we need a new method and an if else statement. create a method named checkResponse in the app.js file. Add the following code.

```JSX
function checkResponse(data){
   if(data.Response==="True"){
    return(
      <div>
         <!-- <img src={data.Poster} alt=""/>
         <h4>Title: {data.Title}</h4>
         <p>Year: {data.Year}</p>
         <p>Writer: {data.Writer}</p>

>          <p>{data.Response}</p> -->

Reviewer: Remove the `<!-- -->`
